Draft of blog post announcing the Remix demo (#1484)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: site/_posts/2022-06-28-remix-demo.md

---
layout: blog-post
title: FusionAuth Remix demo
description: Example of how Remix works with FusionAuth
author: Joyce Park
image: blogs/connecting-fusionauth-remix/connecting-fusionauth-remix-runapp.png
category: blog
tags: remix, remix-run
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
---

Remix is the new hotness in web development! It is an attempt to solve some of the perceived performance issues of React by cleverly splitting up server-side code (called Loaders and Actions) from the functionality that absolutely must be shipped to the client-side, such as JavaScript and CSS for transitions. It also offers benefits in accessibility through a commitment to using web standards and progressive enhancement, and allows for almost all parts of the stack to be easily swapped out, e.g. you can choose from several different datastores that are pre-packaged with Remix for your convenience.

However, new users should be aware that the authentication functionality currently shipped with the basic Remix package does not conform to current best practices.

<!--more-->

> In this post we will explain what problems this might cause for developers, and how to upgrade to a better solution with less work. We are FusionAuth and we build auth servers so our example will naturally use the FusionAuth server, but in principle the same solution should work with any auth service that supports OAuth2 and OIDC.

Reviewer: Changed.

## Why not use Remix's authentication?

The Remix team ships an auth solution with the Indie and Blues stacks, and a very similar one with the Grunge stack. You can see components like join, login/logout, and protected pages in the Notes sample app (`/app/routes/notes`) and in the Jokes sample app that you can build by following the [documentation](https://remix.run/docs/en/v1/tutorials/jokes). Basically these sample apps check the database to see if a user with a particular username and password exists, and if so they set an encrypted session cookie with the userId. Subsequent page loads that require auth will check for the existence of the userId in the database and redirect elsewhere if it doesn't exist.

> This solution is appealingly straightforward and might be sufficient for low-risk uses like the demo -- most people aren't going to care too much about protecting their joke collection, in this case authentication mostly is intended to identify who added which joke to the app -- but modern auth solutions give you far higher levels of security and functionality if deployed properly. For instance, an authentication server such as FusionAuth can very easily allow you to:

Reviewer: I like "auth server". Changed.

There's one somewhat unusual feature of this example, which is that we chose file-based rather than cookie-based session storage. One of the principles of authentication is that you should avoid moving sensitive data around to and from the user-facing client whenever possible, which is why we always recommend a server component for every front-end technology. For instance our [React demo](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-react-2.0) has a client written in React that talks to an Express server which talks to the FusionAuth server. If you compare Remix to React, one of the biggest differences is that Remix has the server built in, so there's no need to run a separate server process.

File-based session storage has one drawback that is only relevant at scale: once you need more than one Remix server, you will have to pin each user to a particular server for the duration of that session. However most developers are unlikely to encounter that kind of problem -- or by the time you do, you'll have the resources to solve it.

> You will also need a working FusionAuth instance. The easiest way to get this for testing purposes is to have a short conversation with a member of our [Sales team](/contact) who will be able to provision a cloud instance for you. The second fastest way is to use the [Docker install](/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/docker). The third fastest way is to use the Fast Path install detailed in our [Five Minute Setup Guide](/docs/v1/tech/5-minute-setup-guide). 

Reviewer: Revised. I think the best thing to do, and what we've done for almost every other tutorial, is point folks to 

* docker 
* and then the variety of installation methods documented in the guide.

You need to create a user and an application in FusionAuth, since that is going to be your user data store. The application represents the Remix application in FusionAuth. You can learn more about [users](/docs/v1/tech/core-concepts/users) and [applications](/docs/v1/tech/core-concepts/applications).

> Another option is to use the [Kickstart project](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-kickstart/tree/master/fusionauth) and [Kickstart](https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/installation-guide/kickstart). This will only work with the latter two installation options, but that's the data I will use for the rest of this tutorial.

Reviewer: Removed.

Once you have a FusionAuth instance, you should be able to go to the admin page and configure your FusionAuth instance like this:

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/connecting-fusionauth-remix/fusionauth-config.png" alt="FusionAuth config for Remix" class="img-fluid" figure=true %}

Important configuration options:

> * Set `Authorized Redirect URLs` to `http://localhost:3000/auth/callback`

Reviewer: Corrected.

* Set `Logout URL` to `http://localhost:3000/logout`

> Then you must copy some values to `env.example`. Here's an example of the `env.example` file, with values filled out. Your values will be different:

Reviewer: Updated.

```
CLIENT_ID="85a03867-dccf-4882-adde-1a79aeec50df"
CLIENT_SECRET="b4xOdsBUWHQkkU3BOqAxSilfttI4TJv9eI_LOj8zVgE"
AUTH_URL="http://localhost:9000"
AUTH_CALLBACK_URL="http://localhost:3000/auth/callback"
```

Change the name of the file to `.env` after setting the correct environment variables using data from the FusionAuth application configuration.

At this point you should be ready to fire up the Remix server and try out the example at a default address of `localhost:3000`.

## Using FusionAuth with Remix

> Once you've done all this configuration, auth will be trivially easy -- because all the hard lifting is being done by FusionAuth. Let's look at some code!

Reviewer 2: I would use "trivial" or "easy" but not both. And "hard lifting" should be "heavy lifting".

> Once you've done all this configuration, auth will be trivially easy -- because all the hard lifting is being done by FusionAuth. Let's look at some code!

Reviewer 2: I would use "trivial" or "easy" but not both. And "hard lifting" should be "heavy lifting".

Navigate to `http://localhost:3000` and click the login link. That will take you to the `/login` route, which looks like this:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Why are we using `bash` language type - isn't this `js`?

Reviewer: good catch

import type { LoaderFunction } from "@remix-run/node"
import { authenticator } from "~/auth.server";

export let loader: LoaderFunction = async ({ request }) => {
  // If the user is already authenticated redirect to /dashboard directly
  return await authenticator.authenticate("FusionAuth", request, {
    successRedirect: "/dashboard",
    failureRedirect: "/error",
  },
  );
};
```

This is all the app code you need to protect any route. As you can see, you will merely be trying the `authenticator.authenticate` method, and redirecting to either the `/dashboard` or the `/error` route on success or failure.

What is this authenticator thing all about? If you open the `/app/auth.server` file, you should see something like this (slightly simplified here):

```bash
import { Authenticator } from "remix-auth";
import { sessionStorage } from "~/session.server";
import { OAuth2Strategy } from "remix-auth-oauth2";

// Create an instance of the authenticator, pass a generic with what

> // strategies will return and will store in the session

Reviewer 2: Not sure I understand this comment.

export let authenticator = new Authenticator<User>(sessionStorage);

authenticator.use(
    new OAuth2Strategy(
        {
            authorizationURL: `${process.env.AUTH_URL}/authorize`,
            tokenURL: `${process.env.AUTH_URL}/token`,
            clientID: process.env.CLIENT_ID || "",
            clientSecret: process.env.CLIENT_SECRET || "",
            callbackURL: process.env.AUTH_CALLBACK_URL || "",

        },
        async ({ accessToken, refreshToken, extraParams, profile, context }) => {
            // This function is MANDATORY for the system to work, and would be the
            // main cause of being redirected to the /error route
            console.log("Verified by FusionAuth!")
        }
    ),
    // this is optional, but if you setup more than one OAuth2 instance you will
    // need to set a custom name to each one
    "FusionAuth"
);
```

> This code leans very heavily on @sergiodxa's OAuth work for Remix, the npm packages `remix-auth` and `remix-auth-oauth2`. It will handle all the tedious boilerplate necessary to negotiate between Remix apps and an OAuth2 authentication service like FusionAuth. As you can see, we just send some secret data -- and remember, this is all sent from the server side of Remix, not from client-side JavaScript! -- which helps tell FusionAuth what app you are trying to log in from, and where you want to go afterwards.

Reviewer 2: Should this be a URL of some sort? `@sergiodxa`

If you are not logged in, our Remix `/login` route will redirect you to the FusionAuth login -- which you can [customize easily](/docs/v1/tech/themes/) with your own CSS! -- which looks like this out of the box:

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/connecting-fusionauth-remix/dinesh-login.png" alt="FusionAuth login screen" class="img-fluid" figure=true %}

> and if you loaded the Kickstart data as directed you should now be able to log in as `dinesh@fusionauth.io` with password `password`. Any specifically login-related errors, like forgetting your password or not being registered, will be handled here.

Reviewer 2: Where did we discuss Kickstart? Is that missing from the guide?

Reviewer: Removed.

If you log in successfully, you will be redirected to `/auth/callback` which checks your login again in code that should be familiar since it's almost identical to the `/login` route:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: `js` instead of `bash`?

import type { LoaderFunction, ActionFunction } from "@remix-run/node";
import { useLoaderData } from "@remix-run/react";
import { sessionStorage } from "~/session.server";
import { authenticator } from "~/auth.server";

export const loader: LoaderFunction = async ({request}) => {
  await authenticator.authenticate("FusionAuth", request, {
    successRedirect: "/dashboard",
    failureRedirect: "/login",
  });
}
```

> and from there dumped into `/dashboard` which is just a message saying you're logged in. If you then try the same click path again, you will get passed through to `/dashboard` without logging in!

Reviewer 2: Should this be a complete sentence instead of trying to continue a sentence from before the code example?

> Yes it really is that simple to get the best authentication in the business! You can also configure FusionAuth to give you extra functionality that would be a pain to hand roll, such as only allowing a certain number of login attempts before sending the user to a timeout. Remix is an exciting solution for app development because it magically handles dividing up the codebase into server-side and client-side functions, and we feel that this approach is very congruent with FusionAuth's authentication philosophy.

Reviewer 2: > Remix is an exciting solution for app development because it magically handles dividing up the codebase into server-side and client-side functions, and we feel that this approach is very congruent with FusionAuth's authentication philosophy.

I don't know if I understand this sentence. I think we may be trying to see this is how SPA based application frameworks should be structured in a secure way? But I don't see how this is an "authentication philosophy".

The Remix team ships an auth solution with the Indie and Blues stacks, and a very similar one with the Grunge stack. You can see components like join, login/logout, and protected pages in the Notes sample app (`app/routes/notes`) and in the Jokes sample app that you can build by following the [documentation](https://remix.run/docs/en/v1/tutorials/jokes). Basically these sample apps check the database to see if a user with a particular username and password exists, and if so they set an encrypted session cookie with the userId. Subsequent pageloads that require auth will check for the existence of the userId in the database and redirect elsewhere if it doesn't exist.

This solution is appealingly straightforward and might be sufficient for low-risk uses like the demo -- most people aren't going to care too much about protecting their joke collection, in this case authentication mostly is intended to identify who added which joke to the app -- but modern auth solutions give you far higher levels of security if deployed properly. For instance, an OAuth2 and OIDC compliant authentication server such as FusionAuth can now very easily allow you to:

> * Offer external authentication by trusted sources such as Google, Facebook, or Apple (known as Identity Providers)

Reviewer: Or you could define `identity provider` above.

> * Set up your org as an Identity Provider for other apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Set up your org as an source of authentication, authorization and user data for other apps
```

> * Access external APIs that require specific kinds of authentication

Author: I put a link to the docu

* Protect your own APIs from unauthorized access
* Limit the scope of authentication to a specific domain or client

> * Let you sleep easily at night knowing that your solution has been professionally security audited for years

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Let you sleep easily at night knowing that your solution has been built and audited by security professionals for years in the past and will continue to be maintained far into the future
```

Reviewer: Looks like you might have missed this one, @troutgirlfusionauth ?

There's one somewhat unusual feature of this example, which is that we chose file-based rather than cookie-based session storage. One of the principles of authentication is that you should avoid moving sensitive data around to and from the user-facing client whenever possible, which is why we always recommend a server component for every front-end technology. For instance our [React demo](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-react-2.0) has a client written in React that talks to an Express server which talks to the FusionAuth server. If you compare Remix to React, one of the biggest differences is that Remix has the server built in, so there's no need to run a separate server process.

File-based session storage has one drawback that is only relevant at scale: once you need more than one Remix server, you will have to pin each user to a particular server for the duration of that session. However most developers are unlikely to encounter that kind of problem -- or by the time you do, you'll have the resources to solve it.

> You will also need a working FusionAuth instance. The easiest way to get this for testing purposes is to have a short conversation with a member of our [Sales team](https://fusionauth.io/contact) who will be able to provision a cloud instance for you. The second fastest way is to use the Docker install. The third fastest way is to use the Fast Path install detailed in our [Five Minute Setup Guide](https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/5-minute-setup-guide). In all cases you should install the development data included in our [Kickstart project](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-kickstart/tree/master/fusionauth).

Reviewer: Would you like to create a sample kickstart file, like the react example app has? 

Note that users can't run kickstart from the cloud, that isn't supported yet.

Oftentimes we run folks through the basics of configuration; see https://fusionauth.io/blog/2020/05/06/securing-asp-netcore-razor-pages-app-with-oauth for example.

> You will also need a working FusionAuth instance. The easiest way to get this for testing purposes is to have a short conversation with a member of our [Sales team](https://fusionauth.io/contact) who will be able to provision a cloud instance for you. The second fastest way is to use the Docker install. The third fastest way is to use the Fast Path install detailed in our [Five Minute Setup Guide](https://fusionauth.io/docs/v1/tech/5-minute-setup-guide). In all cases you should install the development data included in our [Kickstart project](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-kickstart/tree/master/fusionauth).

Author: Yes I could do that but I really think it's a problem to keep repeating how hard it is to stand up FusionAuth and how many steps it entails. Also I'm not good enough at formatting blog posts to put a lot of code in the blog post. From what I could tell, setting up the database and sample data is 1000% the biggest barrier to Remix devs trying this. Multiple members of the Remix core team told me they'd only work on my issue if I had a full-blown FusionAuth instance ready to go for them -- which is why I asked you to stand one up for me.

Once you have a FusionAuth instance, you should be able to go to the admin page and configure your FusionAuth instance like this:

> <img src="/assets/img/blogs/connecting-fusionauth-remix/fusionauth-config.png" />

Reviewer: Please use the image.liquid include. See an example here: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-site/master/site/_posts/2022-04-25-single-sign-on-with-discord.md

`{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/single-sign-on-discord/discord-application.png" alt="Discord Application." class="img-fluid" figure=true %}`

> Then you must copy some values to `env.example` and change the name of the file to .env to set environment variables. At this point you should be ready to fire up the Remix server and try out the example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you must copy some values to `env.example` and change the name of the file to `.env` to set the correct environment variables. At this point you should be ready to fire up the Remix server and try out the example.
```

## Using FusionAuth with Remix

Once you've done all this, auth will be trivially easy -- because all the hard lifting is being done by FusionAuth. Navigate to `http://localhost:3000` and click the login link. That will redirect you to the FusionAuth login -- which you can customize easily with your own CSS! -- and if you loaded the Kickstart data as directed you should now be able to log in as `dinesh@fusionauth.io` with password `password`. You will be redirected to `auth/callback` and from there dumped into `dashboard`. Try the same clickpath again and see what happens! If you want to make sure this was not a fluke, try the `/logout` route.

> Literally every time you need to add authenticatiion to a view, you merely call `authenticator.authenticate` with a successRedirect and a failureRedirect as shown in `app/routes/auth.callback.tsx`. Yes it really is that simple to get the best authentication in the business!

Reviewer: Would be awesome to except some code here

Author: Done!

Reviewer: Heya, I don't see this code in the blog post. Did you push?

Reviewer: Wait, I do in the commit; maybe I didn't pull correctly.

> Literally every time you need to add authenticatiion to a view, you merely call `authenticator.authenticate` with a successRedirect and a failureRedirect as shown in `app/routes/auth.callback.tsx`. Yes it really is that simple to get the best authentication in the business!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Literally every time you need to add authenticatiion to a view, you merely call `authenticator.authenticate` with a `successRedirect` and a `failureRedirect` as shown in `app/routes/auth.callback.tsx`. Yes it really is that simple to get the best authentication in the business!
```
